http://www.diva-portal.org

Postprint
This is the accepted version of a paper published in ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing
Systems. This paper has been peer-reviewed but does not include the final publisher proof-corrections
or journal pagination.

Citation for the original published paper (version of record):
Hjort Blindell, G., Carlsson, M., Castañeda Lozano, R., Schulte, C. (2017)
Complete and Practical Universal Instruction Selection.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems
https://doi.org/10.1145/3126528

Access to the published version may require subscription.
N.B. When citing this work, cite the original published paper.

© Hjort Blindell et al. | ACM} 2017. This is the author's version of the work. It is posted here for
your personal use. Not for redistribution. The definitive Version of Record was published in ACM
Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems (TECS), http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3126528.

Permanent link to this version:
http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:kth:diva-213968

1
Complete and Practical Universal Instruction Selection
GABRIEL HJORT BLINDELL, KTH Royal Institute of Technology and RISE SICS
MATS CARLSSON, RISE SICS
ROBERTO CASTAÑEDA LOZANO, RISE SICS and KTH Royal Institute of Technology
CHRISTIAN SCHULTE, KTH Royal Institute of Technology and RISE SICS
In code generation, instruction selection chooses processor instructions to implement a program under compilation where code quality crucially depends on the choice of instructions. Using methods from combinatorial
optimization, this paper proposes an expressive model that integrates global instruction selection with global
code motion. The model introduces (1) handling of memory computations and function calls, (2) a method for
inserting additional jump instructions where necessary, (3) a dependency-based technique to ensure correct
combinations of instructions, (4) value reuse to improve code quality, and (5) an objective function that reduces
compilation time and increases scalability by exploiting bounding techniques. The approach is demonstrated to
be complete and practical, competitive with LLVM, and potentially optimal (w.r.t. the model) for medium-sized
functions. The results show that combinatorial optimization for instruction selection is well-suited to exploit
the potential of modern processors in embedded systems.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Compilers; Constraint and logic languages; • Hardware → Emerging languages and compilers;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: instruction selection; code generation; constraint programming; combinatorial optimization
ACM Reference format:
Gabriel Hjort Blindell, Mats Carlsson, Roberto Castañeda Lozano, and Christian Schulte. 2017. Complete
and Practical Universal Instruction Selection. ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst. 1, 1, Article 1 (July 2017),
18 pages.
DOI: 10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1

INTRODUCTION

Instruction selection is the task of implementing a program under compilation by selecting instructions from a given processor. It is a crucial part of code generation in a compiler and has been
actively researched for the past four decades (see [28] for a recent survey). The task is typically
decomposed into identifying the applicable instructions and selecting a combination that meets the
semantics of the program under compilation. Instruction selection is an optimization problem as
combinations differ in their efficiency – in certain cases, by up to two orders of magnitude [52].
Most state-of-the-art approaches apply graph-based methods to data-flow graphs only and, to
avoid NP-hard methods, are restricted to trees or DAGs. These restrictions are severe: ad-hoc
routines are needed for handling control flow; the scope of instruction selection is typically limited
This work is supported by the Swedish Research Council (VR 621-2011-6229) and LM Ericsson AB. The article was presented
in the International Conference on Compilers, Architecture, and Synthesis for Embedded Systems (CASES) 2017 and appears
as part of the ESWEEK-TECS special issue.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2017 ACM. 1539-9087/2017/7-ART1 $15.00
DOI: 10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2017.

1:2

Hjort Blindell et al.
processor

instructions

pattern set
builder

pattern set
matcher

function

UF graph
builder

matches

modeler

constraint
model

solver

solution

code
emitter

code

UF graph

Fig. 1. Overview of the approach.

to single basic blocks, hence forsaking crucial optimization opportunities by design; and many
instructions of modern processors, such as DSPs (digital signal processors), are not supported [28].
Moreover, other code generation problems cannot readily be integrated with instruction selection.
Approach. In this paper, we use a new approach called universal instruction selection [29] that
addresses many of the limitations mentioned above. The approach (see Fig. 1 for an overview) is
based on constraint programming, where problems of combinatorial optimization are expressed
as constraint models. Our constraint model captures many aspects of instruction selection. It
accurately reflects the interaction between control and data flow of both programs and processor
instructions, enabling uniform treatment of data and control flow and selecting instructions globally
for an entire function. These features jointly enable support for complex instructions, such as SIMD
(single input, multiple data) and hardware-loop instructions, which often appear in embedded
systems. This is especially important for processors where instructions can be tailored for a specific
program and therefore can be arbitrarily complex. The model also integrates global code motion
which allows computations to be moved across block boundaries, thereby advancing use of complex
instructions. Moreover, as the model can potentially be solved to optimality, our approach provides
a complement to the greedy heuristics applied in state-of-the-art compilers, which are suitable
for day-to-day development (where short compilation times are imperative) but suboptimal for
deployment (where longer compilation times can be tolerated in favor of higher code quality).
The constraint model is based on universal function graphs, a graph-oriented representation that
also enables global code motion. The representation was recently introduced in [29], together with
a basic constraint model for universal instruction selection. The basic model has several limitations:
it fails to handle memory computations and function calls; it is unable to produce code in cases
where additional jump instructions must be inserted; it can potentially produce incorrect code in
certain cases where complex memory instructions are available; it may select more instructions
than necessary, which limits code quality; it lacks scalability; and it has been evaluated on a limited
set of small benchmark programs on a hypothetical processor architecture.
Contributions. We extend the approach in [29] to overcome the limitations above and make
several crucial improvements to the constraint model, thus making universal instruction selection
complete and practical. More precisely, we make the following contributions:
• We describe a complete instruction selector that supports memory computations and
function calls, and can insert additional jump instructions where necessary.
• We achieve correctness by detecting and prohibiting illegal instruction combinations that
could potentially result in cyclic data dependencies.
• We increase code quality by introducing alternative values to enable value reuse, thereby
avoiding redundant recomputation.
• We decrease compilation time and increase scalability by refining the objective function
and applying bounding techniques, where we exploit LLVM to provide a first solution.
• We evaluate the approach using medium-sized benchmark programs and real hardware
(Hexagon V5 [48]), which are typical for embedded systems.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2017.

Complete and Practical Universal Instruction Selection

1:3

These contributions are significant as they turn a basic model for universal instruction selection
into a complete and practical model.
Plan of the paper. The required background is introduced in Sect. 2. The following sections discuss
memory computations and function calls (Sect. 3), jump insertion (Sect. 4), cyclic data dependencies
(Sect. 5), and value reuse (Sect. 6), which are crucial for the constraint model introduced in Sect. 7.
The approach is evaluated in Sect. 8. Related work is discussed in Sect. 9 and conclusions and future
work in Sect. 10.
2

BACKGROUND

Graph-based Instruction Selection. The prevailing approach to instruction selection is to apply
graph-based methods. As is common, the unit of compilation is a single function consisting of a
set of basic blocks (henceforth referred to simply as blocks), where exactly one block represents
the function’s entry block. From the function one or more data-flow graphs are constructed, which
are directed graphs where computation nodes represent computations in the function and edges
represent data dependencies between computations. Data-flow graphs confined to a single block are
called block graphs, and data-flow graphs that capture the data flow of entire functions are called
function graphs. A local instruction selector operates on block graphs whereas a global instruction
selector operates on function graphs.
Likewise, a data-flow graph called pattern graph (or simply pattern) is constructed for each
instruction of a given processor. The set of all patterns for a processor constitutes a pattern set. The
problem of identifying all applicable instructions for a given function is thus reduced to finding all
instances where a pattern in the pattern set is subgraph isomorphic to the block or function graph.
Such an instance is called a match.
A set of matches covers a block or function graph д if each computation node in д appears in
exactly one match. By assigning a cost to each match that corresponds to the cost of selecting the
instruction, the problem of finding the best combination of instructions is reduced to finding a
cover with least cost. It is well known that the subgraph-isomorphism and optimal graph-covering
problems are NP-complete in general, but for block graphs both problems can be solved optimally
in linear time if the block and pattern graphs are limited to trees [28].
Constraint Programming. Constraint programming [49] is a combinatorial optimization technique
for solving computationally hard problems. Instead of solving a problem directly using problemspecific heuristics – which typically yield suboptimal solutions – in constraint programming one
first models the problem, and then solves the model.
A constraint model consists of a set of variables with finite domain (typically integers), a set
of constraints expressing relations among the variables, and an objective function. A solution is
a variable assignment that satisfies all constraints, and a solution is optimal if it maximizes (or
minimizes) the value of the objective function. A model instance is a constraint model that has been
instantiated with the parameters for a specific instance of the problem.
A constraint solver (or just solver) finds solutions to a given model instance by performing
propagation and search. Propagation removes values for variables which are in conflict with a
constraint and thus cannot appear in any solution. If any variable remains unassigned and no
further propagation is possible, search attempts several value choices on which propagation and
search is interleaved. Propagation is essential for reducing the search space.
Many problems have recurring structural patterns that constraint programming can exploit
through global constraints. A global constraint expresses problem-specific relations among several
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2017.

1:4

Hjort Blindell et al.

variables, offering two benefits: it eases modeling, and it enables strong propagation which drastically reduces the search space.
Static Single Assignment Form. An intermediate representation (IR) based on static single assignment (SSA) is a representation where each program variable is defined exactly once [17]. For
example, the program shown in Fig. 2a is not in SSA form as the variables n and f are redefined
within the loop. To disambiguate cases where the definition depends on control flow, SSA uses socalled φ-functions which take a value and the block from where the value originates as arguments.
By splitting n and f into several variables and merging their values using φ-functions, we get the
program shown in Fig. 2b, which is in SSA form.
Given a function represented in SSA form, a data-flow graph called SSA graph can be constructed [26]. By including φ-nodes, the SSA graph can capture data flow of entire functions, which
is an enabler for global instruction selection. Matches derived from patterns that only cover φ-nodes
are called φ-matches.
Universal Function Graphs. We use universal function graphs (or UF graphs for short) to refer to
the program representation introduced in [29] (see Fig. 2c for an example). A UF graph is essentially
a combination of two graphs: a control-flow graph, consisting of block nodes and control-flow edges,
which is extended with control nodes to represent jumps; and an SSA graph, which is extended with
value nodes to represent values. An important invariant is that every control node and value node
has exactly one inbound control-flow edge and data-flow edge, respectively. Consequently, value
nodes not produced through computation – such as constants and function arguments – have a
data-flow edge from the node representing the function’s entry block.
As with SSA graphs, the UF graph does not dictate in which block a given computation should
be executed, which is crucial for enabling global code motion. Having no restraints at all, however,
may lead to code that violates the program semantics. Consequently, the UF graph contains
definition edges to indicate that a given value must be produced within a specific block. The
concerned values are exactly those connected to φ-nodes, which is sufficient to preserve the
program semantics.
Since the UF graph contains several kinds of nodes, a refined notion of coverage is given in
[29]: a set of matches covers a UF graph if each operation appears in exactly one match, where an
operation refers to either a computation node or a control node in the UF graph. We will also use
the term blocks to refer to block nodes in the UF graph.
Global Code Motion. Global code motion is the task of moving computations from one block
to another in order to increase code quality. We formalize the global code motion problem by
reiterating the definitions given in [29]. If a datum d refers to a value node in the UF graph, then
a match m defines respectively uses d if there exists an inbound respectively outbound data-flow
edge from d in the pattern of m. Hence a datum can be both defined and used by the same match.
Next, a block b dominates another block c if every control-flow path in the UF graph that goes from
the function’s entry block to c also goes through b. By definition, a block always dominates itself.
Hence a placement of selected matches into blocks is a solution to the global code motion problem
if each datum d is defined in some block b such that b dominates every block wherein d is used,
excluding uses made by φ-matches. The last clause is needed as blocks appearing as arguments to
φ-functions do not necessarily dominate the block wherein the φ-function is placed. For example,
in Fig. 2b the φ-function in the end block demands that value f3 is defined in the body block, which
clearly does not dominate end. This is the reason for applying definition edges to enforce that f1
and f3 are defined in the correct blocks. Likewise, a definition edge is also applied for f4 to enforce
correct placement of the φ-function.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2017.

Complete and Practical Universal Instruction Selection

1:5

entry:
f1 ← n1
c.br 1 < n1 , body, end
T

body:

n2 ← φ(n1 :entry, n3 :body)
f2 ← φ(f1 :entry, f3 :body)
f3 ← f2 * n2
n3 ← n2 - 1
c.br 1 < n3 , body, end

int fact ( int n) {
int f = n;
for (; 1 < n; n - -)
f = f * n;
return f;
}

(b) Corresponding SSA IR and control-flow graph.

n1

1

cp

f1

φ

φ

n2

f2

c.br
1

T
body
1
T

T

f4 ← φ(f1 :entry, f3 :body)
ret f4

<
F

F

end:

(a) C code.

entry

F

c.br

<

−

∗

n3

f3

φ

F
end

f4

ret

(c) Corresponding UF graph. Thick-lined diamonds, boxes, and arrows represent control nodes, block nodes,
and control-flow edges, respectively. Thin-lined circles, boxes, and arrows represent computation nodes, value
nodes, and data-flow edges, respectively. Dotted lines represent definition edges. For readability, the value
node with value 1 has been duplicated and the data-flow edges from the entry block to the value nodes
representing constants and function arguments have been removed.
Fig. 2. The factorial function written in C, transformed into an SSA-based IR, and then into a UF graph.

ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2017.

1:6

Hjort Blindell et al.

Some complex instructions impact both instruction selection and
entry
p
v1
v2
global code motion. Assume for example a match m of the pattern
T
shown in Fig. 3, which models an instruction that assigns a register
φ
c.br
if
one of two values depending on whether a given predicate is true or
F
false. Assume further that the entry, if, and end blocks in the pattern
br
are mapped to blocks in a UF graph labeled A, B, and C, respectively.
A match spans the blocks in the UF graph mapped to blocks in the
end
pattern. Hence m spans A, B, and C. Of these, m consumes B as the
instruction of m assumes full control of the control flow to and from
Fig. 3. A conditional assignB. Consequently, no other computations may be placed in blocks
ment instruction
consumed by some selected match.
As demonstrated in Sect. 8, solving global instruction selection and global code motion in unison
enables use of complex instructions that would otherwise not have been selectable.
3

MEMORY COMPUTATIONS AND FUNCTION CALLS

As with arithmetic computations, we represent memory computations and function calls as computation nodes (see Fig. 4 for an example). Nodes representing memory loads and stores have a
fixed number of inbound and outbound data-flow edges, while nodes representing function calls
may have an arbitrary number of data-flow edges (depending on the function being called). This
also enables the calling convention of the target machine – that is, how to pass the arguments and
return value – to be implemented through patterns as these can apply location requirements on
the data being used or defined (see Eq. 11 in Sect. 7).
Memory computations and function calls may have side effects which are not observable from the
data and control flow. As the order in which these are executed may affect the program semantics,
the order given in the function must be preserved. We introduce state nodes to capture this order,
and refine the definition of data to also include state nodes. As shown in Fig. 4, each memory
computation and function call takes exactly one state node as input and produces another state
node as output, thus forming state dependencies which exactly capture the necessary order between
such operations. Each state flow is limited to a single block, where the first and last state node in
the chain has a data-flow edge and a definition edge, respectively, from the block node. This is to
forbid memory computations and function calls from being moved to another block as well as to
comply with the invariant that every datum has exactly one inbound data-flow edge.
4

JUMP INSERTION

For certain combinations of functions and target machines, the produced code may need to include
more jumps than originally specified in the function. In most architectures, a branch instruction
jumps to a given label if the condition holds, otherwise the execution continues to the next
instruction (known as fall-through). Hence the block representing the false label must follow the
branch instruction in the code. However, in Fig. 2b we see that the end block is the false label of two
conditional jumps, residing in blocks entry and body. Since end cannot follow both entry and body,
an unconditional jump to end must be inserted after one of the conditional jumps.1 We address
this by extending the pattern set with new patterns, called dual-target branch patterns, that insert
additional jump instructions if selected.
1 In this particular case, the problem could also be solved by negating the condition and swapping the false and true labels

in one of the conditional jumps. However, there exist cases where this is not sufficient (for example, consider two loops that
share the same exit block).

ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2017.

Complete and Practical Universal Instruction Selection

1:7

block

block:
t1 ← ld p
t2 ← call foo, t1
st q ← t2
(a) IR.

ld
p

st

foo
t1

t2

(b) UF graph. Gray boxes represent state nodes.

Fig. 4. An example illustrating how to capture memory computations and function calls in the UF graph.

q1 m 1

p2 ← p1 + 4
st q1 ← p2
q2 ← q1 + 4
st p1 ← q2
(a) IR.

4

m 2 p1

+

+

q2

p2

st

st

(b) UF graph, covered using two matches derived
from an auto-increment store instruction.

m1

m2

(c) Dependency graph.

Fig. 5. A program at risk of cyclic data dependency. For brevity, state nodes are not included in the UF graph.

The idea works as follows. Given a pattern set S, find the pattern дbr ∈ S that corresponds to an
unconditional jump (it is reasonable to assume such a pattern exists). Then, for each pattern д ∈ S
that corresponds to a conditional jump with a fall-through condition to block b, add to S a new
pattern h that has the same graph structure as д and emits the instruction represented by д followed
by the instruction represented by дbr . Because h has no fall-through condition, h represents a
conditional jump targeting two blocks (hence its name). The new pattern set containing all dualtarget branch patterns is denoted S ext .
This idea of extending the pattern set can also be generalized to include branch patterns that flip
the predicate used in conditional jumps, which is applied in techniques like trace scheduling [22]
to alleviate block reordering and jump elimination.
5 CYCLIC DATA DEPENDENCIES
Modern processors often contain complex instructions that could potentially lead to cyclic data
dependencies. As pointed out by Ebner et al. [18], this can happen with memory instructions that
automatically increment the address register after a load or store. See for example Fig. 5. If both
matches are selected, then either value p2 or value q2 will be used before it is available (depending
on the instruction order), thus resulting in incorrect code. Consequently, such combinations must
be identified and forbidden.
We detect such combinations – which could involve more than two matches – by constructing a
dependency graph and finding all cycles (we use Johnson’s algorithm [30]). A node in the dependency
graph represents a match m, which has a directed edge if m produces data used by another match.
For example, in the dependency graph shown in Fig. 5, m 1 has an edge to m 2 due to value q2 , and
m 2 has an edge to m 1 due to value p2 . φ-matches are not included as they will always yield cycles
that are not due to true cyclic data dependencies, and neither are null matches (matches that emit
nothing if selected) as they will never be the cause of such dependencies.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2017.

1:8

Hjort Blindell et al.

v

v

(a) UF graph.

v

cp

cp

cp

cp

v1

v2

v1

v2

(b) After copy extension.

(c) With alternative values.

Fig. 6. A UF graph covered by a match with two alternative values. Dotted edges indicate potential use of
such values.

6

VALUE REUSE

Code quality can be increased if instructions are allowed to reuse copies of values, which is a crucial
feature to be expected in the code emitted by any modern instruction selector. See for example
Fig. 6a, in which a value v is used by two computation nodes and one of them is covered by a
match. After copy extension – a transformation described in [29] used to handle architectures with
instructions that require data to reside in specific locations – the computations will instead use the
two newly introduced values v1 and v2 , respectively, as shown in Fig. 6b. Assume now that v resides
in a location where it must first be copied elsewhere before used. It may for example reside on the
memory stack, which is a common calling convention in architectures with few registers. Without
value reuse, a copy would be performed for each such use. But because v1 and v2 are copies of the
same value, one copy might be sufficient (depending on the instructions using the values). We say
that v1 and v2 are copy-related and therefore interchangeable, meaning the match is free to use
either of values v1 and v2 , as shown in Fig. 6c. Consequently, if a match m uses but does not define a
value v 1 , and v 1 is copy-related with values v 2 , . . . , vk , then v 1 , . . . , vk are alternative values to m.
We utilize alternative values by allowing a value node in a pattern to map to multiple (copyrelated) value nodes in the UF graph. We do this by first finding all matches and then expanding
each match with alternative value node mappings. Another approach is to first expand the UF graph
with additional data-flow edges and then merge matches that differ only in value node mappings,
but that complicates the matching algorithm and incurs an unnecessary computational overhead.
We then extend the constraint model by essentially adding an extra level of indirection wherever a
constraint refers to a particular datum, which is detailed below.
7

CONSTRAINT MODEL

Match Identification. For a given UF graph G and a pattern set S ext , the match set M contains
all instances where a pattern in S ext is subgraph isomorphic to G. Like in [29], we compute M
using VF2 [16] – a well-known subgraph isomorphism algorithm – and apply the same method for
removing illegal matches.
Operation Coverage. The two sets of variables sel[m] ∈ {0, 1} and omatch[o] ∈ Mo model whether
match m ∈ M is selected respectively which selected match covers operation o ∈ O, where O denotes
the set of operations in G, and Mo ⊆ M denotes the set of matches that can cover o. The condition
that each operation must be covered by exactly one selected match can then be modeled as
omatch[o] = m ⇔ sel[m],
∀o ∈ O, ∀m ∈ Mo ,
where sel[m] abbreviates sel[m] = 1 (likewise, for a variable x ∈ {0, 1}, ¬x abbreviates x = 0).
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2017.

(1)

Complete and Practical Universal Instruction Selection

1:9

Data Definitions. Similarly, each datum must be defined by exactly one selected match. The set
of variables dmatch[d] ∈ Md models which selected match defines datum d ∈ D, where Md ⊆ M
denotes the set of matches that can define d, and D denotes the set of data in G. The condition can
then be modeled as
dmatch[d] = m ⇔ sel[m],
(2)
∀d ∈ D, ∀m ∈ Md .
Global Code Motion. The two sets of variables oplace[o] ∈ B and dplace[d] ∈ B model in which
block operation o respectively the definition of datum d is placed, where B denotes the set of blocks
in G. In order to decide in which block to place a selected match m, all operations covered by m are
required to be placed in the same block. If covers(m) ⊆ O denotes the set of operations covered by
match m, then the condition can be modeled as
sel[m] ⇒ oplace[o 1 ] = oplace[o 2 ],
∀m ∈ M, ∀o 1 , o 2 ∈ covers(m).

(3)

Jump operations are forbidden to be placed in another block than originally indicated in the
UF graph as that would most likely break the program semantics. Let entry(m) ∈ B denote the entry
block of match m if the pattern of m has such a node, otherwise entry(m) = ∅. The condition can
then be modeled as
sel[m] ⇒ oplace[o] = b,
(4)
∀m ∈ M, ∀o ∈ covers(m), ∀b ∈ entry(m).
Each datum d must be defined in some block b ∈ B such that b dominates every block wherein d
is used (with the exception of φ-matches). In addition, we want to make use of alternative values.
Assume therefore that, instead of defining and using data, a match defines and uses operands. Every
definition or usage in a match incurs a new operand, which will be mapped to a datum. Hence
the set of variables alt[p] ∈ Dp models to which datum operand p ∈ P is mapped, where Dp ⊆ D
denotes the alternative values available for p, and P denotes the set of operands applied in M.
Let defines(m) ⊆ P and uses(m) ⊆ P and denote the set of operands defined respectively used by
match m. Let also dom(b) ⊆ B denote the set of blocks that dominate block b. The condition can
then be modeled as
dplace[alt[p]] ∈ dom(oplace[o]),
(5)
∀m ∈ Mφ , ∀p ∈ uses(m), ∀o ∈ covers(m),
where Mφ denotes the set M excluding φ-matches.
The conditions imposed by the definition edges are modeled as
dplace[d] = b,
∀⟨d, b⟩ ∈ E,

(6)

where E denotes the set of definition edges in G.
The oplace and dplace variables are connected as follows: if a match m spans any blocks then
every datum d defined by m may be defined in any of the spanned blocks, otherwise d must be
defined in the same block wherein m is placed. This is because there exist cases where the constraint
model would become over-constrained if only the latter clause was applied. Assume for example a
match m of the pattern shown in Fig. 3. Due to Eq. 4 the operations covered by m must be placed in
the block b in G corresponding to the pattern’s entry block. Due to the definition edges, however,
the datum corresponding to value v1 in the pattern must be defined in a block different from b. If
spans(m) ⊆ B denotes the set of blocks spanned by match m, then the conditions can jointly be
modeled as
sel[m] ⇒ dplace[alt[p]] ∈ {oplace[o]} ∪ spans(m),
(7)
∀m ∈ M, ∀p ∈ defines(m), ∀o ∈ covers(m).
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2017.

1:10

Hjort Blindell et al.

Lastly, no operations must be placed inside blocks consumed by a selected match. Hence, if
consumes(m) ⊆ B denotes the set of blocks consumed by match m, then the condition can be
modeled as
sel[m] ⇒ oplace[o] , b,
(8)
∀o ∈ O, ∀m ∈ M, ∀b ∈ consumes(m).
Inactive Data. Due to Eq. 5 there may be data that is not used by any match, but Eq. 2 requires that
every datum must still be defined. This is addressed by extending the pattern set with a kill pattern,
consisting of a single copy node which uses one datum and defines another datum. Matches derived
from kill patterns are called kill matches, which are also null matches. A datum is inactive if it is
defined by a kill match, and non-kill matches are forbidden to use inactive data.
With the set of variables inactive[d] ∈ {0, 1}, which models whether a datum d is active, the
condition can be modeled as
sel[m] ⇔ inactive[alt[p]],
(9)
∀m ∈ M × , ∀p ∈ defines(m),
sel[m] ⇒ ¬inactive[alt[p]],
(10)
∀m ∈ M × , ∀p ∈ uses(m),
where M × and M × denote the set of kill matches respectively the set M excluding kill matches.
Data Copying. The set of variables loc[d] ⊆ L ∪ {l null } models in which location a datum d
is available, where L denotes the set of possible locations, and l null denotes the location of an
intermediate value produced by an instruction that can only be accessed by this very instruction.
For example, the address computed by a memory load instruction with a sophisticated addressing
mode cannot be reused by other instructions. Thus, if stores(m, p) ⊂ L denotes the set of permitted
locations for an operand p defined or used by match m – where an empty set means no restrictions
are imposed – then the condition can be modeled as
sel[m] ⇒ loc[alt[p]] ∈ stores(m, p),
∀m ∈ M, ∀p ∈ P s.t. stores(m, p) , ∅.
The condition that forbids reuse of intermediate values can be modeled as
sel[m] ⇒ loc[alt[p]] = l null ,
∀m ∈ M, ∀p ∈ intvalues(m),

(11)

(12)

where intvalues(m) ⊆ P denotes the set of intermediate values produced by match m. It is assumed
that copy extension (see [29]) has been performed on the UF graph.
Fall-through Branching. The set of variables succ[b] ⊆ B models the successor of block b, and
a valid block order corresponds to a cycle formed by the succ variables. Using the global circuit
constraint [37], the condition can be modeled as
circuit (∪b ∈B {succ[b]}).

(13)

If a match m is derived from an instruction that performs a fall-through to block b, then the condition
can naively be modeled as sel[m] ⇒ succ[entry(m)] = b. However, this constraint is too limiting
as it is not uncommon that an empty block is placed between entry(m) and b. Hence we extend the
constraint to allow fall-through via an empty block. Let J denote a set of tuples, consisting of a
match and a block to which the match falls through, and let M ⊥ denote the set of null matches.
The constraint can then be modeled as

succ[succ[entry(m)]] = b ∧ empty(succ[entry(m)]) ∨ succ[entry(m)] = b,
(14)
∀⟨m, b⟩ ∈ J ,
where empty(b) = oplace[o] , b ∨ omatch[o] ∈ M ⊥ , ∀o ∈ O.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2017.

Complete and Practical Universal Instruction Selection

1:11

Cyclic Data Dependencies. As explained in Sect. 5, combinations of matches that will result in
cyclic data dependencies must be forbidden. If F ⊂ 2M denotes the set of such combinations, then
the condition can be modeled as
Õ
sel[m] < | f |, ∀f ∈ F.
(15)
m ∈f

Objective Function. The objective function reflects the desired characteristics of the produced
code. For example, if the compiler should maximize performance then the execution time of each
block should be minimized. As is common, the execution time should also be weighted with the
relative execution frequency of each block, which is typically estimated through static analysis. A
straightforward objective function can be modeled as
Õ
sel[m] × cost(m) × freq(place(m)),
(16)
m ∈M

where cost(m) ∈ N denotes the cost of match m (typically the instruction latency), freq(b) ∈ N
denotes the execution frequency of block b, and place(m) ∈ B denotes the block wherein m is
placed.
However, the objective function in Eq. 16 is naive as it yields poor propagation, resulting in long
compilation times. A better approach is to reason about the cost incurred by each operation (which
must always be covered) instead of each match (which may or may not be selected).
The set of variables ocost[o] ∈ N thus models the cost incurred by operation o. The cost per
operation is computed as follows. For each match m, evenly divide the cost of m among the
operations covered by m. Let cost(m, o) ∈ N denote this cost. Then, for each operation o covered by
m
Í and block b wherein o could be placed, multiply cost(m, o) by the execution frequency of b. Hence
o ∈covers(m) freq(b) × cost(m, o) = freq(b) × cost(m). By representing this information as a matrix


m ∈ M,


C =  o, m, b, freq(b) × cost(m, o) o ∈ covers(m), 
(17)


b
∈
B


one can connect the omatch, oplace, and ocost variables by requiring that, for each operation o,
the tuple ⟨o, omatch[o], oplace[o], ocost[o]⟩ must appear as a row in C. This can be enforced using
the global table constraint [39], thus allowing the condition to be modeled as
table (⟨o, omatch[o], oplace[o], ocost[o]⟩, C) ,
∀o ∈ O.
Lastly, the objective function to minimize is modeled as
Õ
cost =
ocost[o],

(18)

(19)

o ∈O

where cost ∈ N models the total cost of the solution.
Bounding the Cost Variable. To find the optimal solution – that is, the solution which minimizes or
maximizes the objective function – most solvers apply a method known as branch and bound [34].
The idea is to first find some initial solution with cost c and then enforce that all later found
solutions must have a cost strictly less than c, thereby avoiding the parts in the search space that
only contain inferior solutions. This is repeated until no more solutions are found, where the last
found solution is optimal.
The solving time can be decreased by bounding the cost variable, which reduces the search
space. This is particularly important for proving optimality. We obtain a lower bound by solving a
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2017.

1:12

Hjort Blindell et al.

relaxation of the problem which we model using variables omatch, opcosts, sel, succ, and totalcost
together with Eq. 1 and modified versions of Eq. 13, 14, and 17–19. The cost of an optimal solution
to the relaxed model is always less than or equal to the cost of any solution to the full model. We
obtain an upper bound by taking the cost of the solution found by LLVM, which only takes a tiny
fraction of the time it takes to solve the model itself. If C relaxed ∈ N and C LLVM ∈ N denote the costs
found using the relaxed model and LLVM, respectively, then the bounding conditions can jointly
be modeled as
C relaxed ≤ cost < C LLVM .

(20)

If no solution exists when using C LLVM as lower bound, then it means no code better than that
produced by LLVM can be produced by the constraint model.
Implied Constraints and Dominance Breaking. Simply modeling a problem as a constraint model is
in most cases not sufficient for solving the problem in practice, typically due to too weak propagation
and too large a search space. Consequently, a constraint model must often be extended with implied
(or redundant) constraints (to strengthen propagation) and dominance breaking constraints (to
remove solutions that are no better than other solutions). Our constraint model is no exception,
but due to space restrictions we only briefly discuss a few of them in this paper.
Several implied constraints are based on the fact that for every operation, a covering match must
be selected, and for every datum, a defining match must be selected. For example:
• Suppose that for a given non-ϕ-node operation o and data u and d, where all matches
covering o use u, define d and span no blocks. Then o must be placed in the block defining
d, which must be dominated by the block defining u.
• Suppose that for a given operation o and block b, b is the entry block of all matches that
cover o. Then o must be placed in b.
• Suppose that for a given non-state datum d, its defining matches do not include any kill
matches, and they all define d accessible by other instructions. Then the location of d
cannot be l null .
Dominance breaking constraints include the following:
• The location of all state data is fixed to l null .
• For any match that is not selected, its alt variables are fixed to their minimal values.
• Any kill match whose operation can be covered by a null match, or whose datum it defines
has no copy-related values, is redundant and thus fixed as not selected.
• Copy-related values cause value symmetries in the solution space. Let V = {v 1 , . . . , vn } be
a set of copy-related values. Then any solution can be converted to an equivalent solution
simply by picking two members vi and v j from V and swapping all their occurrences.
We break such symmetries with value precedence constraints [38], which state that any
occurrence of v j in the solution must be preceded by an occurrence of v j−1 , ∀1 < j ≤ n.
Limitations. In some cases, it is beneficial to recompute the same value instead of reusing it. In
terms of graph-based instruction selection, this means letting an operation be covered by more
than one match. However, Eq. 1 and 2 enforce that every operation and datum must be covered
respectively defined by exactly one selected match, and several other constraints depend on this
assumption. Consequently, a solution that is optimal with respect to the constraint model may still
be inferior to that produced by an instruction selector which supports recomputation.
Another limitation is that fall-through branching across more than one empty block will still
result in redundant jump instructions.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2017.

Complete and Practical Universal Instruction Selection

1:13

Model Differences. Compared to the constraint model introduced in [29], only the loc and succ
variables remain unchanged. Variables alt, cost, dmatch, dplace, inactive, ocost, omatch, oplace
are new, where dplace and oplace respectively replace the def and place variables in [29].
Regarding the constraints, only Eq. 6 is identical to Eq. 5 in [29]. Equations 1, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, and 13
are respective reformulations of Eq. 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9 in [29]. Equations 17, 18, and 19 are
jointly a reformulation of Eq. 11 in [29]. Equations 2, 3, 9, 10, 12, 14, 15, and 20 are new constraints.
Equations 2 and 10 in [29] become obsolete in this constraint model due to lack of null blocks.
8

EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION

We implemented the constraint model in MiniZinc 2.1.3 [45] – a high-level constraint modeling
language – and solved the instances using Chuffed [14] – a lazy clause learning constraint solver
which is included in MiniZinc. The experiments were run using a single thread on a Linux machine
with an Intel Xeon E5-2680 v3 at 2.50 GHz and 64 GB main memory. Since we are solving optimal
graph covering – which is an NP-complete problem – we limit solving time with a timeout.
As input for the experiments we use functions extracted from the MediaBench suite [40] and
processor instructions from Hexagon V5 [48] – a DSP with a rich instruction set that appears in
many embedded systems. The functions (in LLVM IR) are generated with LLVM 3.8 [36] using the
-O3 optimization level. 284 candidate functions are filtered out of an initial pool of 6313 functions.
A function is a candidate if it is medium-sized (between 50 and 200 LLVM IR instructions, yielding
function graphs between 189 and 1524 nodes) and does not contain non-scalar or floating-point
LLVM instructions (which are not yet supported due to limitations in our tool chain but not in the
approach). Finally, 20 functions are selected by sampling out of the candidate pool. The purpose
of sampling is to make the experiments feasible (so that they can be reproduced in the order of
hours) while ensuring a certain diversity in the selected function graphs. The sampling procedure
splits the candidate functions into 20 clusters with a k-means clustering algorithm and randomly
selects a function out of each cluster [47]. Functions are clustered by size (in number of LLVM IR
instructions), number of memory instructions (one of the main sources of complexity for instruction
sets with rich addressing modes such as Hexagon’s), and original application (to improve the spread
across MediaBench).
Alternative Values. To evaluate the impact of using alternative values, we implemented two
versions of the constraint model: one using alternative values; and one without alternative values
to serve as baseline, thereby mimicking the capabilities of the basic model introduced in [29]. All
instances of the baseline model were solved to optimality using C relaxed as lower cost bound and
no upper bound, with the exception of the build_ycc_rgb_t and gpk_open functions where the
solver timed out even after half an hour. To reduce experiment runtime, we used the costs of the
optimal solutions to the baseline model as upper bounds for the instances of the other model, which
were then solved with a timeout of 1800 s. Since the intention of alternative values is to increase
code quality, we expect to see an overall execution speedup over the baseline model.
Fig. 7 shows the estimated execution speedup of using alternative values. The geometric mean
speedup is 5.4%, and for every function the constraint model with alternative values produced code
that is better or equally good as that produced by the baseline model. Hence alternative values
yield significant and consistent code quality improvements over the baseline model.
Alternative values primarily yield speedup when the function is data-bound. For example, the
gl_init_lists function – which initializes a large data structure – consists mainly of instructions
that write constants to memory. Many of these constants are used more than once and are often
too large to fit as immediates to the instructions. This leads to many redundant copy instructions
emitted by the baseline model which are not needed when making use of alternative values. In
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2017.

1:14

Hjort Blindell et al.
:

70%
60%
50%
40%

:

30%

:

20%
10%
0%

:
all

oc_

all
o

nam

e_i

che
cks

c_s
a

ve_

s_s

.

deb

ug_

um

spa

c.

gl_
gl_
gl_
gp_
gl_
gl_
gl_
gl_
Tex
Ena
ini
sav
sav
sav
swa
enu
Ima
dum
ble
t_l
p4
mer
e_C
e_E
e_P
ge3
p_b
Cli
ist
olo
ush
ate
val
DEX
yte
ent
s
_fi
r4u
Poi
Mat
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

gs_

jin

int

jpe

it_

erp

_in

for

it

g_r

war

d_d

tru
ead

_he

.

eRa

ade

.

:

wri
ndA

zer

te_

ccu

o

fil

m

e_t

rai

.

Fig. 7. Estimated execution speedup with alternative values. Bars marked with dots indicate solver timeouts.
70%
refined objective function
with bounds

60%
50%

refined objective function
40%
30%
20%
naive objective function
with bounds
10%
naive objective function
0%
1s

10 s

100 s

1000 s

Fig. 8. Cumulative number of optimality proofs found over time using four constraint models.

contrast, no speedup is gained for the alloc_name_is_s function – which consists of a long chain
of if-then-else checks – where most of its values are only used once throughout the entire function.
Compilation Time. To evaluate the impact of using the refined objective function and cost
bounding, we implemented four more versions of the constraint model: one using the naive
objective function given in Eq. 16; one using the refined objective function given in Eq. 17–19; one
combining the naive function with bounds; and one combining the refined function with bounds. All
models used alternative values and C relaxed and C LLVM as the lower and upper bound, respectively.
We then produced code for the same functions and target as in the previous experiment, with a
timeout of 60 s for computing the lower bound and 600 s for solving the model, and measured the
solving time for proving optimality for each model. We expect the first model to be outperformed
by the second and third models, which in turn are expected to both be outperformed by the fourth
model. All solving times were averaged over 10 runs, for which the maximum coefficient of variation
was 9.6%. The time spent on pattern matching was negligible (less than 2% of the total runtime,
which was dominated by the solving time).
Fig. 8 shows the cumulative frequency distribution of optimality proofs found over time, which
includes lower bound computation time and solving time. We see clearly a significant increase
in scalability from using the refined objective function, which manages to prove optimality for
UF graphs with up to 1415 nodes, compared to the naive function as used in [29], which only scales
to 203 nodes (the increase is not due to more memory as no function required more than 4 GB
during solving, and the hardware used in this experiment was only 19% faster [1]). We also observe
that bounding has an overall positive impact for both objective functions, with the exception of
one long-running case where cost bounding seems to have a negative impact on the solver.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2017.

Complete and Practical Universal Instruction Selection

1:15
:

15%

:
10%

:
5%

0%

all

oc_

all
o

nam

e_i

:

:

:

:

deb
che
gl_
gl_
gl_
gl_
gl_
gl_
gl_
gp_
gpk
gs_
jin
jpe
tru
wri
zer
ug_
o
cks
Ena
Tex
ini
sav
sav
ld_
enu
_op
int
it_
g_r
eRa
te_
sav
swa
dum
um
ble
Ima
t_l
ycc
fil
e_C
e_E
e_P
mer
en
erp
ead
ndA
p4
for
p_b
Cli
ge3
ist
e_t
_rg
olo
val
ate
_in
_he
ccu
ush
war
spa
y
rai
e
D
b
s
r
P
M
_
m
i
d
a
te.
nt.
EX.
_t.
4u.
oi.
at.
fi.
t
_d.
de.
c.
.

bui

c_s
a

s_s

ve_

.

Fig. 9. Estimated execution speedup over LLVM. Bars marked with dots indicate solver timeouts.

Comparison with LLVM. To evaluate how our approach compares to the state of the art, we
compared the quality of the code emitted by our combined model implementation against the code
emitted by the instruction selector in LLVM, which is a greedy heuristic that mimics maximum
munch (always pick largest match) [28]. We used the same functions and target as in the alternative
values and compilation time experiments, with a timeout of 600 s for the solver, using no upper
bound. All estimated execution cycle counts were averaged over 10 runs, for which there was no
variation. As LLVM is limited to tree-shaped patterns, is unable to move operations across blocks,
and relies on local-based, greedy heuristics – thereby limiting use of complex instructions – we
expect to see an overall improvement.
Fig. 9 shows the estimated execution speedup over LLVM. The geometric mean speedup is 2.5%,
hence our approach is competitive with LLVM. The cases showing a speedup are predominantly
due to global code motion and block ordering. In the alloc_save_spac, gp_enumerate_fi, and
gpk_open functions, for example, our approach is able to lift operations – constant loads in particular
– out of blocks with high execution frequency into blocks with lower frequency, thereby reducing the
cost. In the jpeg_read_header, gl_TexImage3DEX, and gl_EnableClient functions, our approach
rearranges the blocks to remove one to two jump instructions. Also, in alloc_save_spac our
approach is able to move an addition and memory operation into the same block and implement both
using a single auto-increment memory instruction, whereas LLVM must implement these operations
using two instructions. Improvements such as these become possible only when integrating global
instruction selection with global code motion.
In three cases (gl_swap4, gp_enumerate_fi, and zero), LLVM is able to recompute memory
addresses as part of the memory instruction and eliminate common subexpressions. Although none
of these features is directly supported in our approach, we could work around these limitations
by adding special patterns that exactly cover the operations involved in the recomputations or
common subexpression eliminations. Without these special patterns, our approach would produce
worse code than LLVM for the three cases above.
9

RELATED WORK

Several local, linear-time, least-cost covering algorithms exist for tree-based block and pattern
graphs [2, 24, 46], which subsequently have been extended to DAG-based block graphs at the loss
of optimality [20, 21, 33]. Together with instruction scheduling and register allocation, instruction selection has also been approached using integer programming [8, 25, 54] and constraint
programming [7, 23, 44]. Far fewer methods exist for global instruction selection, which so far only
has been approached as a partitioned Boolean quadratic problem [11, 18, 19] or using constraint
programming [29]. Common among these techniques is that they are restricted to tree-based and
DAG-based patterns, whereas our approach can operate on full-fledged pattern graphs.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2017.

1:16

Hjort Blindell et al.

Global code motion has been solved both in isolation [15, 22] as well as in integration with
register allocation [6, 31]. Moreover, attempts at exploiting fine-grained instruction level parallelism
using SIMD instructions [35, 42] suggest that the selection of such instructions should be done
together with global code motion. Although many methods exist for selecting SIMD instructions in
isolation, with a few that combine it with instruction selection [4, 41, 51], but to the best of our
knowledge only our approach performs these three tasks in unison.
Several attempts have been made to reduce the number of jump instructions through block
reordering [9, 22]. Common among these approaches is that they apply tailored algorithms for
finding, replacing, and removing conditional jump instructions, whereas our approach rely on
the selection of special patterns to perform these actions. Jump instructions can also be removed
through if conversions (in some architectures, instructions can be predicated with a Boolean register
that decide whether the instruction should be executed) [3, 27, 32, 53], which can be supported by
our approach if the pattern set is extended with the appropriate patterns.
An idea similar to alternative values is introduced in [13] to address a related problem that
appears in register allocation and instruction scheduling, where spilled values may be reused by
multiple instructions when they are loaded back from memory.
The problem of cyclic data dependencies has been considered in several instruction selection
techniques [18, 50]. In [18] such dependencies are found by identifying strongly connected components in the function graph and then forbidding conflicting decisions via a cost matrix. In [50]
the approach instead relies on a dependency graph but, unlike our approach, applies iterative and
greedy methods for breaking cycles.
10

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

This paper introduces a complete and practical approach to universal instruction selection: it handles
memory computations and function calls; it inserts additional jump instructions where necessary;
it ensures correct combinations of instructions; it improves code quality; and it increases scalability.
The approach is demonstrated to be competitive with LLVM and potentially optimal (w.r.t. the
model) for medium-sized functions targeting hardware which is typical for embedded systems.
Future work includes addressing the model limitations and increasing robustness and scalability
by strengthening propagation with more implied and dominance breaking constraints and presolving techniques. We also intend to integrate existing models for register allocation and instruction
scheduling [12, 13].
In addition, many peephole optimizations can be readily modeled as patterns, and several tools
exist for automatic discovery and verification of such patterns [5, 10, 43]. We intend to exploit
these tools to automatically extend the pattern set with these patterns in order to further improve
code quality.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank Sebastian Buchwald for bringing cyclic data dependencies to our attention
and the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and helpful suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1] CPU Benchmarks – Single Thread Performance. PassMark Software. URL: http://www.cpubenchmark.net/
singleThread.html, updated June 2, 2017.
[2] A. V. Aho, M. Ganapathi, and S. W. K. Tjiang. Code Generation Using Tree Matching and Dynamic Programming.
ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, 11(4):491–516, 1989.
[3] J. R. Allen, K. Kennedy, C. Porterfield, and J. Warren. Conversion of Control Dependence to Data Dependence. In
POPL’83, pages 177–189, 1983.
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2017.

Complete and Practical Universal Instruction Selection

1:17

[4] M. A. Arslan and K. Kuchcinski. Instruction Selection and Scheduling for DSP Kernels on Custom Architectures. In
DSD’13. IEEE, 2013.
[5] S. Bansal and A. Aiken. Automatic Generation of Peephole Superoptimizers. In ASPLOS’06, pages 394–403. ACM, 2006.
[6] G. Barany and A. Krall. Optimal and Heuristic Global Code Motion for Minimal Spilling. In CC’13, pages 21–40.
Springer, 2013.
[7] S. Bashford and R. Leupers. Constraint Driven Code Selection for Fixed-Point DSPs. In DAC’99, pages 817–822.
ACM/IEEE, 1999.
[8] A. Bednarski and C. W. Kessler. Optimal Integrated VLIW Code Generation with Integer Linear Programming, 2006.
[9] J. Boender and C. Sacerdoti Coen. On the Correctness of a Branch Displacement Algorithm. In TACAS’14, pages
605–619. Springer, 2014.
[10] S. Buchwald. Optgen: A Generator for Local Optimizations. In CC’15, pages 171–189. Springer, 2015.
[11] S. Buchwald and A. Zwinkau. Instruction Selection by Graph Transformation. In CASES’10, pages 31–40, 2010.
[12] R. Castañeda Lozano, M. Carlsson, F. Drejhammar, and C. Schulte. Constraint-based Register Allocation and Instruction
Scheduling. In CP’12, pages 750–766. Springer.
[13] R. Castañeda Lozano, M. Carlsson, G. Hjort Blindell, and C. Schulte. Combinatorial Spill Code Optimization and
Ultimate Coalescing. In LCTES’14, pages 23–32. ACM, 2014.
[14] G. G. Chu. Improving Combinatorial Optimization. PhD thesis, The University of Melbourne, Australia, 2011.
[15] C. Click. Global Code Motion/Global Value Numbering. In PLDI’95, pages 246–257. ACM, 1995.
[16] L. P. Cordella, P. Foggia, C. Sansone, and M. Vento. A (Sub)Graph Isomorphism Algorithm for Matching Large Graphs.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 26(10):1367–1372, 2004.
[17] R. Cytron, J. Ferrante, B. K. Rosen, M. N. Wegman, and F. K. Zadeck. Efficiently Computing Static Single Assignment
Form and the Control Dependence Graph. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, 13(4):451–490,
1991.
[18] D. Ebner, F. Brandner, B. Scholz, A. Krall, P. Wiedermann, and A. Kadlec. Generalized Instruction Selection Using
SSA-Graphs. In LCTES’08, pages 31–40. ACM, 2008.
[19] E. Eckstein, O. König, and B. Scholz. Code Instruction Selection Based on SSA-Graphs. In SCOPES’03, pages 49–65.
ACM, 2003.
[20] M. A. Ertl. Optimal Code Selection in DAGs. In POPL’99, pages 242–249. ACM, 1999.
[21] M. A. Ertl, K. Casey, and D. Gregg. Fast and Flexible Instruction Selection with On-Demand Tree-Parsing Automata.
In PLDI’06, pages 52–60. ACM, 2006.
[22] J. A. Fisher. Trace Scheduling: A Technique for Global Microcode Compaction. IEEE Transactions on Computers, 30(7):
478–490, 1981.
[23] A. Floch, C. Wolinski, and K. Kuchcinski. Combined Scheduling and Instruction Selection for Processors with
Reconfigurable Cell Fabric. In ASAP’10, pages 167–174. IEEE, 2010.
[24] C. W. Fraser, R. R. Henry, and T. A. Proebsting. BURG: Fast Optimal Instruction Selection and Tree Parsing. SIGPLAN
Notices, 27(4):68–76, 1992.
[25] C. H. Gebotys. An Efficient Model for DSP Code Generation: Performance, Code Size, Estimated Energy. In ISSS’97,
pages 41–47. IEEE, 1997.
[26] M. P. Gerlek, E. Stoltz, and M. Wolfe. Beyond Induction Variables: Detecting and Classifying Sequences Using a
Demand-driven SSA Form. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, 17(1):85–122, 1995.
[27] T. Granlund and R. Kenner. Eliminating Branches Using a Superoptimizer and the GNU C Compiler. In PLDI’92, pages
341–352. ACM, 1992.
[28] G. Hjort Blindell. Instruction Selection: Principles, Methods, and Applications. Springer, 2016. ISBN 978-3-319-34017-3.
[29] G. Hjort Blindell, R. Castañeda Lozano, M. Carlsson, and C. Schulte. Modeling Universal Instruction Selection. In
CP’15, pages 609–626. Springer, 2015.
[30] D. B. Johnson. Finding All the Elementary Circuits of a Directed Graph. SIAM Journal on Computing, 4(1):77–84, 1975.
[31] N. Johnson and A. Mycroft. Combined Code Motion and Register Allocation Using the Value State Dependence Graph.
In CC’03, pages 1–16. Springer, 2003.
[32] A. Jordan, N. Kim, and A. Krall. IR-level Versus Machine-level If-conversion for Predicated Architectures. In ODES’13,
pages 3–10. ACM, 2013.
[33] D. R. Koes and S. C. Goldstein. Near-Optimal Instruction Selection on DAGs. In CGO’08, pages 45–54. IEEE/ACM,
2008.
[34] A. H. Land and A. G. Doig. An automatic method of solving discrete programming problems. Econometrica: Journal of
the Econometric Society, pages 497–520, 1960.
[35] S. Larsen and S. Amarasinghe. Exploiting Superword Level Parallelism with Multimedia Instruction Sets. In PLDI’00,
pages 145–156. ACM, 2000.

ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2017.

1:18

Hjort Blindell et al.

[36] C. Lattner and V. Adve. LLVM: A Compilation Framework for Lifelong Program Analysis & Transformation. In
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization, pages 75–86. IEEE, 2004.
[37] J.-L. Laurière. A Language and a Program for Stating and Solving Combinatorial Problems. Artificial Intelligence, 10(1):
29–127, 1978.
[38] Y. Law and J. Lee. Symmetry Breaking Constraints for Value Symmetries in Constraint Satisfaction. Constraints, 11
(2-3):221–267, 2006.
[39] C. Lecoutre and R. Szymanek. Generalized Arc Consistency for Positive Table Constraints. In CP’06, pages 284–298.
Springer, 2006.
[40] C. Lee, M. Potkonjak, and W. H. Mangione-Smith. MediaBench: A Tool for Evaluating and Synthesizing Multimedia
and Communications Systems. In MICRO’97, pages 330–335. IEEE, 1997.
[41] R. Leupers. Code Selection for Media Processors with SIMD Instructions. In DATE’00, pages 4–8. IEEE, 2000.
[42] J. Liu, Y. Zhang, O. Jang, W. Ding, and M. Kandemir. A Compiler Framework for Extracting Superword Level Parallelism.
In PLDI’12, pages 347–358. ACM, 2012.
[43] N. P. Lopes, D. Menendez, S. Nagarakatte, and J. Regehr. Provably Correct Peephole Optimizations with Alive. In
PLDI’15, pages 22–32. ACM, 2015.
[44] K. Martin, C. Wolinski, K. Kuchcinski, A. Floch, and F. Charot. Constraint-Driven Instructions Selection and Application
Scheduling in the DURASE System. In ASAP’09, pages 145–152. IEEE, 2009.
[45] N. Nethercote, P. J. Stuckey, R. Becket, S. Brand, G. J. Duck, and G. Tack. MiniZinc: Towards a Standard CP Modelling
Language. In CP’07, pages 529–543. Springer, 2007.
[46] E. Pelegrí-Llopart and S. L. Graham. Optimal Code Generation for Expression Trees: An Application of BURS Theory.
In POPL’88, pages 294–308. ACM, 1988.
[47] A. Phansalkar, A. Joshi, L. Eeckhout, and L. K. John. Measuring Program Similarity: Experiments with SPEC CPU
Benchmark Suites. In ISPASS’05, pages 10–20. IEEE, 2005.
[48] Hexagon V5/V55 Programmer’s Reference Manual. Qualcomm Technologies Inc., Aug 2013. 80-N2040-8 Rev. A.
[49] F. Rossi, P. v. Beek, and T. Walsh. Handbook of Constraint Programming. Elsevier Science Inc., 2006. ISBN 0-444-52726-5.
[50] V. Sarkar, M. J. Serrano, and B. B. Simons. Register-sensitive Selection, Duplication, and Sequencing of Instructions. In
ICS’01, pages 277–288. ACM, 2001.
[51] H. Tanaka, S. Kobayashi, Y. Takeuchi, K. Sakanushi, and M. Imai. A Code Selection Method for SIMD Processors with
PACK Instructions. In SCOPES’03, pages 66–80. Springer, 2013.
[52] V. Živojnović, J. Martínez Velarde, C. Schläger, and H. Meyr. DSPstone: A DSP-Oriented Benchmarking Methodology.
In ICSPAT’94, pages 715–720. Miller Freeman, 1994.
[53] N. J. Warter, S. A. Mahlke, W.-M. W. Hwu, and B. R. Rau. Reverse If-Conversion. In PLDI’93, pages 290–299. ACM,
1993.
[54] T. Wilson, G. Grewal, B. Halley, and D. Banerji. An Integrated Approach to Retargetable Code Generation. In ISSS’94,
pages 70–75. IEEE, 1994.

ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: July 2017.

